# Results

## Diversity statistics

We computed the diversity statistics for various different cohorts in order to observe how they change between locations, time points and taxa. 
We observe no statistically significant difference in term of diversity statistics within a taxa through time or geography despite the great distance and number of generations separating the various cohorts. 
It might be worth observing that two populations in Mali (An. coluzzii from Dallowere collected in May and June 2014) look a little different.  
All An. coluzzii aerial samples were grouped together. 
Their diversity statistics look quite different from the ones for other An. coluzzii cohorts. 
When comparing the diversity statistic with surrounding countries we observe very similar results from Burkina Faso and the two northern locations in Côte d'Ivoire and Ghana. 
Diversity statistics are slightly different in southern, or costal, regions of Côte d'Ivoire, Ghana and Benin. 
The diversity statistics are even more different for the Guinean samples.

Looking at the diversity statistics for An. gambiae, we observe something similar to what was observed for An. coluzzii.. 
All cohorts, except for the ones from Kangaba which are much older, yield very close results. 
Because there is only one aerial An. gambiae sample, it could not be compared to other cohorts. 
When comparing with cohorts from other countries, we get very similar results for a range of cohorts reaching as far the Central African Republic in 1994 and the Democratic Republic of the Congo. 
Some cohorts, in southern Ghana, Gabon and Togo yield, maybe significantly, lower values while one cohort in Burkina Faso from Haut-Bassins seems to yield higher, though not significantly so, values.

In Mali, diversity statistics also look very similar between An. gambiae and An. coluzzii but diversity statistics look different for the only An. arabiensis cohorts. 
If we extend this analysis to other samples from West Africa, we observe that this trend continues but the An. arabiensis from the Gambia and Mali have slightly higher diversity stats than the An. arabiensis from Burkina Faso. 
We can also see that some of the cryptic taxa (gcx1 and gcx2) have similar diversity statistics to An. gambiae and An. coluzzii while gcx4 and An. melas have much lower diversity stats than even the An. arabiensis cohorts.

Computing FST between cohorts of the same taxon yields very low results but there are some noticeable differences. 
For An. coluzzii, when FST is computed using the X or 2L chromosomes, the values are higher when comparing samples collected in 2004 to more recent samples showing that there might have been some population changes between 2004 and 2012. 
When using other chromosome arms, the most salient population is the one from Yanfolila in 2012. 
The aerial mosquitoes yield also higher FSTs when compared to other populations when FST is computed using only the X chromosome but not as much when using other chromosome arms instead. 
If considering only the cohorts that are more recent (not from 2004) and not as geographically distant (excluding the cohort from Yanfolila), time and distance seem to have little effect on FST. 

The situation is somewhat similar for An. gambiae s.s. 
When looking at the X chromosome, two cohorts yield significantly higher FST results when compared to any other cohort and they are the cohort from Kati 2004 and the only cohort from Yanfolila. 
Looking at the chromosome arm 2R, these two cohorts plus the other cohort from 2004 (Bla) yield much higher FSTs. 
When looking at the 3 other chromosome arms, the temporal effects seems to be much less pronounced and the cohort from Yanfolila is the only one yielding higher FST results.

As expected, when all taxa are compared, the FST values separate cohorts depending on their taxon. The FST yielded by pairs containing arabiensis are also much higher which is consistent with An. arabiensis being more diverged from the An. gambiae s.s. / An. coluzzii group than An. coluzzii is diverged from An. gambiae s.s.. 

When the analysis is extended to cohorts coming from different countries, some geographical structure seems to appear. 
Among An. coluzzii, the samples from Guinea yield significantly higher values when compared to other cohorts. 
The samples from coastal regions in Benin, Côte d'Ivoire and Ghana seem to form a distinct group.

When all taxa are considered, Fst separates the taxa in the expected fashion: An. melas cohorts yield high Fst compared with any non-melas cohort, An. arabiensis does as well but to a lesser extent. 
gcx4 yields similar values as An. arabiensis but has a high Fst when compared to arabiensis cohorts. 
Finally, gcx1 and gcx2 yield results similar to An. gambiae s.s. and An. coluzzii though gcx1 seems to yield values in the same range compared to An. gambiae s.s. and An. coluzzii whereas gcx2 yields lower values when compared to An. coluzzii.

These observations are generalized across all chromosome arms but X tends to show sharper differences between taxa.

We also looked at some cohorts that yielded low F<sub>ST</sub> and observed that the values are slightly lower between the cohorts in Mali than they are when comparing with ones in Burkina Faso. 
When assigning samples from these cohorts randomly, the F<sub>ST</sub> values are even lower showing that there might be some population structure between the populations in Mali but very weak. 

## SNPs

- IR profiles are very similar for every population of the same taxon and some are different between taxa?
- Some temporal trends observed elsewhere (para) present here as well but somewhat muddled in some locations
- We have not found any location specific SNP

## CNVs

- I am still unclear on the final result of that analysis

## Haplotypes

- IR haplotypes are highly shared between locations and sometimes taxa?

## Locator

- Pretty good at high level (including on new data)
- Does not work at the required definition

## Doubleton-sharing

- Didn't find a geographical or temporal correlation ?

## IBD

- Still to be seen
[^1]: 

[^1]: 
