# Discussion

## Aestivation or migration

In order to decide whether _Anopheles_ mosquitoes in the Sahel aestivate during the dry season or migrate, it is important to know what kind of behaviour each hypothesis represents and what are their expected impacts on population structure within and between cohorts.
It is worth remembering that mosquitoes are, at least a priori, not long-lived enough to survive for a whole weather cycle; meaning that aestivation or migration is a behaviour at the cohort (or population) scale and not an individual behaviour.
It is also important at this point to state that not all members of the cohort are expected to have the exact same behaviour.
The first assumption is that part of the cohort acts and survives during the dry season in a very similar way to how it would act and survive during the rainy season; the main difference being that the cohort size is reduced as the availability of resources is reduced.
This, in particular, means that many generations of mosquitoes will live the entirety of their existence during the dry season. 
We consider that a cohort aestivates if some of its members, instead of continuing life during the dry season in a normal way, become inactive for a long period allowing them to survive during all or almost all of the dry season.
In substance, an aestivating cohort reduces significantly the number of generations between two consecutive rainy seasons.
The definition of a migrating cohort is less straightforward as there are more possible options.
The most drastic version of migration sees the cohort travel with the winds that also drive the change of weather; that is to say, such a migrating cohort would always be around the frontier of the rain, moving south as the dry season establishes itself from north to south and the other way when the rainy season starts to expand northerly.
A migrating cohort following this pattern would move great distances (over 500 km in each direction) and (potentially) interact with many more stationary cohorts allong the way.
Another option would be for a cohort to move only as far as strictly necessary for survival of enough members for the cohort to be able to rebuild its numbers quickly. 
This option is fairly similar to the previous one but might be made possible while moving less by substituting the need for a pond or other water source created by precipitation for one that is man-made, for example, due to agriculture.
The lessened need for long-range movement would probably reduce the pressure on the population.
The final option that we consider is similar to the previous one, in that it relies on the presence of breeding sites independent from precipitation, but using only unassisted movement (or maybe some piggy-backing with human transportation). 
This last model would also be fairly similar to what would happen if the cohort disappeared entirely during the dry season and was replaced from an opportunistic population from a more hospitable location.